So all this data center numbers are
weighted towards the end of the decade.
Whereas the new solar is right here,
right now crushing power prices.
>> So you actually want to be a little
short power for the next few years and
then flip to being long.
>> And if you can figure out when that flip
is, you can make a lot of money in
either the forward power curves or the
natural gas curves. But as far as your
original question, as I said, data
centers two, three years to build new
power plants for five. But then you
don't need as many new power plants as
everyone's saying. So Constellation CEO
said on a call the other day. He said he
used the Texas market. He said 87 gawatt
peak market. You could add 10 gawatts to
Texas tomorrow which would be the
equivalent of sending every single
Nvidia chip for an entire year to Texas
and running them 24/7. That's 10
gigawatts. He was you could run it right
now existing grid existing plants for
all but 40 50 hours a year. We stress
tested it. There are some coal plants
that can ramp up capacity factor.
There's plenty of gas plants that can.
So, I don't know if it's 40 hours, 100
hours, 150 hours, but it makes more
sense to pay someone else not to run
their chemical company, their refinery
company for 40, 50 hours a year rather
than have the utilities go out and spend
$10 billion connecting far away wind
farms. That's the argument. We're sort
of come in the middle of it. But there
is plenty of existing capacity on the
grid that could ramp up to meet it.
Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy
Aloway
>> and I'm Joe Weisenthal.
>> Joe, imagine you are a utilities
analyst.
>> Yeah. Fun.
>> And for years you are laboring in the
utility analysis minds
>> and you know we like talking about
utilities. We like talking about energy.
We find pretty much anything
interesting. That's right. Equal
opportunity uh interest people. We are.
But
>> yes,
>> you got to say utilities for a while,
some people would say it was a little
boring, a
>> little quiet. No, that's right. I mean,
for most of our careers, I think if you
were a utilities analyst, a really big
part of your job, and maybe I'm wrong,
but I just in the popular discourse was
like talking about yield relative to
treasuries, right? They were seen as
sort of bond like instruments, etc.
maybe a little bit of growth, but
roughly
>> viable safe havenish dividend plays, I
guess.
>> Totally. And since I know where we're
going with this conversation, one of the
themes of the last few years has been
what I would say is the old industries
that were either stable or cyclical
becoming secular in the way they grow.
>> I think that's right. So what is
happening now is if you were I don't
want to say a lowly utilities analyst
but you know maybe a sort of forgotten
utilities analyst outside of your sector
suddenly you are very in demand right
because all you hear about nowadays is
the AI buildout and energy constraints
on that and so obviously a lot of people
want to look at it from a utilities
perspective.
>> Totally. I always think like what a
great luck that some people have in
their careers. You know, you could be an
analyst and learn modeling skills and
all kinds of stuff and then you get
allocated and someone gets allocated to,
I don't know, farm equipment and another
person gets allocated to they wind up in
utilities in 2022 and it's like, man,
they're on TV all the time. My old boss
boss at Business Insider, Henry Blahett,
it's like he was there as an internet
analyst in like the late 90s. What
amazing timing and luck. And so,
>> but it's like journalism in the years.
>> That's right. It's the same. It's the
exact same thing. We started out
covering airlines of all things, but
those were interesting. Anyway,
>> I'm glad to say we do in fact have the
perfect guest. So, we're going to be
speaking to a utilities analyst, someone
who happens to have a very contrarian
take on the data center buildout and how
much energy is actually required. We've
been hearing a lot from people who are
very very bullish on the data center
buildout. So, this will be a useful
counter point.
>> I love it.
>> Okay. So without further ado, uh Andy
Dere, head of investment grade credit
and head of utilities and power over at
credit sites. Thank you so much for
coming on a thoughts.
>> Thank you. The pleasure is mine.
>> So is it great to be a utilities analyst
right now? Even better.
>> Well, your your Bloomberg News reporter
Josh Shaw wrote an article about the how
much it's changed to be a utilities
analyst now the data centers are here.
But to push back, we did have the
largest bankruptcy of all time in Enron.
>> Oh yeah. the largest LBO of all time in
TXU which then went bankrupt and the
largest private equity return ever in
Calpine 25 billion which exceeds
Apollo's Lionel trade and Blackstone's
Hilton trade. So we have had a lot of
fun along the way.
>> Have you been a utilities analyst
throughout that entire timeline? How
long have you been doing it?
>> I started with the first pack gas
bankruptcy and then went through the
second and here we are with data center.
So 25 years.
>> Wow. So you really have seen it all. It
is fair to say. So you're absolutely
right. There have been some disasters
and home runs and utilities, you know,
um they do get central in the news
obviously with the fires um that we saw
for example in California several years
ago and the court trials about
allocation of risk in those uh
situations. You mentioned Enron etc. But
it is also fair to say that much of the
discourse in day-to-day has been like
these are sort of bond-like instruments.
Absolutely.
>> Before we get into that, just like sort
of like talk to us about what a what a
normal day is like and when you're
thinking about utility before you know
Yeah. Pre-data centers five years ago,
whatever. Pre-data centers, you're
looking at a lot of rate cases. You're
studying a lot of local news, you're
looking at legislation, you're reading
uh, you know, dry regulatory documents
and then you're tracking natural gas
prices because that's setting the price
of power. And then on the federal level,
you obviously have the renewables
displacing coal, and that's you know,
obviously having a big impact now. So,
it's it's a lot. I actually think it's a
lot of fun.
>> My impression was always the policy
aspect of it seemed kind of the most
important thing to keep track of. Is
that right?
>> Absolutely. And that's down to the state
level, but also the federal as well.
>> Yeah, we've done a few energy episodes.
Still trying to wrap my head around the
sort of patchwork of um rules that seem
to govern our energy uh infrastructure.
But anyway,
>> there's something, by the way, a little
bit like I'm trying I'm going to try and
not say an offensive word. Um
>> do it, Joe. do it.
>> There's something a little aspy about
the way like you talk to people in the
space and you're like, "Well, how does
this get priced?" And they're like,
>> "Well, are you talking about market or
central?" It's like, "Okay, I don't I
don't know." You know, it's like, "Are
you talking about a rate board? Are you
talking about market prices?" It's so
hard. Anyway, especially in a 40-minute
podcast to try to generalize that,
>> but I love the people, don't get me
wrong. Those are my favorite people.
>> Anyway, Andy, what is the mood like at
the moment among uh utilities, people,
analysts, investors? Wasn't there a
conference recently?
>> Everyone's uh gung-ho on this. So, the
biggest conference of the year is EI in
November and uh it was packed. I was
standing room only for some of these
presentations.
>> Wow.
>> Uh your competitors at CNBC were
broadcasting from the floor.
>> Is that the first time that happened?
>> Probably a sign of a top.
>> Uh so yeah, people are very happy. And
then just to quantify it, utilities have
generally grown around four, five, six%
a year and then that's moved to 5 to 7%
a year. And now certain names which
we'll talk about later are up to 8% a
year and that's driven by data center
growth. Talk to us uh a little bit more
about that. So what is the I mean I'm
like looking at a chart of the XLU ETF.
I don't think it's like done insane but
talk to us a little bit about like maybe
quantify the exuberance for us. So it's
like okay we we are no longer just in
the business of measuring bond proxies
and looking at policies etc. There was a
secular growth driver. Talk to us about
like the bull case and then also how we
would see the bull case sort of like how
it's manifesting into tradable
instruments.
>> Sure. And you pulled up the graph of the
XLU. Obviously it's still a very
interest rate sensitive sector. People
are playing dividends. You can find
higher yields in other fixed income
instruments. So you know maybe didn't do
so well last year. Uh but the industry
argues that as this EPS growth rate goes
up to the high single digits, mid to
high single digits that it shouldn't be
as interest rate sensitive. So that's
the big debate going on with investors
right now.
>> And the stock I mean the XLU has done
very well. So you have gotten both the
capital. It has gone done well. It's
gone up.
>> If you zoom out, it looks pretty good.
It's done well.
>> That's my impression of a Bitcoin
investor by the way. Zoom out.
>> Just zoom out. Right. Think about you've
gotten the and you've gotten that
coupon, right? So like you get so like
you might in normal times just be happy
with a coupon. You're getting coupon
plus.
>> I mean it worked out. The Fed went zero
interest rates for so long. So utilities
are the place to be. That's just math.
And then as soon as the Fed starts
jacking up rates, chatbt comes on the
scene and all of a sudden there's data
centers. So now all of a sudden you're
taking the leg up on growth when you
don't need to be so interest rate
sensitive.
>> Interesting. So, one of the reasons we
wanted to talk to you is because you
have that contrarian take on the data
center buildout and we wrote it up in
the uh OddLotss newsletter which
everyone should subscribe to. It got a
lot of attention. Your analysis
interestingly is just based on some
pretty simple math. So why don't you
just to start out with why don't you
walk us through the calculations that
you're actually making to try to analyze
how much capacity the utilities are
taking on to actually power data
centers.
>> Sure. So as as you said it's pretty
simple math here. So utility so data
centers now are consuming around 45
gawatts of power and you can switch
between capacity and throughput. I'm
going to stick with capacity.
>> Okay. So 45 gigawatts of power and then
there's lots and lots of third-party
estimates for where they're going to be
in 2030 and they center around this you
know 90 95 gigawatts so you need to add
50 for 2035
there's a lot fewer estimates you come
around 160
>> now these estimates they you know
they're all over the place they get come
from sellside banks they come from
consultants they come from everyone BNF
has one they're I think one of the best
out there uh so
>> thank you
>> we use them a lot. So, so that's on the
demand side of where you're going to
come out on these. And then you look at
the supply and everyone talks about the
demand, right?
>> Oh, yeah.
>> But then you look at the supply and all
these tech bros are too cool to actually
look at the supply and do utility
analysis, right? Who wants to be a
utility analyst? You were making fun of
us before.
>> But if you look at this, you look,
>> we're pitying you, but and we realize
our pity was misplaced, but we were not
making fun. Anyway, keep going.
>> Great. So you look at the supply and
these utilities are tracking all these
data centers connecting to the grid
because they've got to do a lot of work,
spend a lot of money on transmission,
distribution, new substations,
transformers. It's a lot of work, but it
boosts their earnings growth. So they're
happy to talk about this. And so you
look at where they're at and where
they're they see things coming and
they've got around 140 gawatts of
near-term supply. Now kudos to the
utilities. They break out what's firm,
committed, signed, contracted versus
pipeline behind it because there's a lot
of double, triple, quadruple counting.
So if you're going to build a data
center in the southeast, you're going to
tell Duke, you're going to tell
Southern, you're going to tell Dominion,
you're going to build one.
>> So that's the pipeline potential. But
looking just at the firm committed,
whatever they want to call it, you're on
140 gigawatts. Now that's you got to pee
adjust that. So when you connect a data
center,
>> that's pee.
>> Yeah. When you connect a data center to
the grid, you've got lights, you've got
cooling. Those third party estimates I
gave you are just for raw compute.
>> Why did you split those out, though?
Because I mean, all data centers are
going to need to be cooled down, right?
What's the point of splitting it out?
>> I'm not splitting out. I'm just
adjusting it downward because the third
party estimates are just compute. So, if
you're connecting to the grid,
>> you're going to ask for the lights, the
cooling, and everything. Yeah. So, I
want to go apples to apples versus the
third party.
>> So, what does PUE stand for?
>> Power usage effectiveness or power usage
efficiency. keep going.
>> So they're at 140. So that PUE is down
to 110 on apples to apples. So just to
go back, you only need 50 on the demand
side between now and 2030. And the
utilities are working at connecting 110.
So the utilities are working on already
connecting almost as much as you need by
2035.
So again, just to make sure we're on the
same page, third party estimates, 45
gawatts for data centers now going to
95. That's 50. utilities are working on
110. They don't give timing for that.
Some of it's going to be past 2030. What
I'm trying to say is there is a lot of
supply of data centers coming and it's
very unclear if there's going to be
demand for this. So that's that's the
issue there. And then it might be worth
pausing that and just saying how we're
tracking these things.
>> Yeah.
>> So what we do for the demand side is we
use the original AI agent. Do you know
what that is?
>> A Gmail alert.
>> Oh yeah.
>> The best. So we anything that's not in
our trade pubs, not on Bloomberg News,
we get picked up by a Gmail alert. And
so then we get all that in a
spreadsheet. So that's on the demand
side. And then on the supply side, we
use Diego. And that's not a large
language model. That's my junior sitting
several blocks west of us right now. So
he tracks all this on utility calls.
Just yesterday, Next Era moved another
two gigawatts from the potential into
the committed. And these utilities are
chomping at the bit to sign more and
more of these deals. And I think it's
just going to be over supply. we're
going to overbuild these things.
>> Just to be clear, the firm commitments,
those are signed agreements to actually
build this capacity.
>> Yes. Okay.
>> And so I was talking with the CFO of
Encore and they made these comments on
their call as well. They're owned by
Serra
>> and I said, you know, no one really
believes these damnand estimates. Texas
is a walled off market as you guys know.
87 gawatt peak market.
>> That is the one thing I know about
energy. Texas is its own walled off
market. Yeah,
>> there you go. 87 gigawatt peak market
and the demand estimates are they're
going to add 30 gigawatts by 2030. And I
said to the CFO of an I said there's
just no way. He said it might not be 30
but it's going to be closer to 30 than
it is zero. And I said I just the
forward power curves don't reflect that
at all. And he said then they're
mispriced. So just for the entire market
just for the benefit of your users you
cannot trade forward power in Texas on
Interactive Brokers. I know that your
audience that's too bad. Everyone's like
looking up there. No, but this is great
and this gives us a bunch of um
technical questions to get into. So, I'm
already Let's just keep talking about
Texas.
>> Explain to us kind of what the forward
power curves are and how you can back
out the implicit um assumptions that
traders or are making based on those
forward power curves about how much
demand there's going to be.
>> Sure. So I mean obviously if you're
going to go from 87 and you're going to
add 15 or 30 whatever it is you'd expect
that curve to go higher.
>> So what's the curve measuring? Okay you
say there's a forward power curve.
>> So the forward power curve is around the
clock peak or off peak. There's three
separate curves and the difference
between peak and off peak is actually
you know narrowed because data centers
run 247. So it depends if you're north
Texas or south Texas and those are in
the high 50s. But what would we be
seeing in the curves for like 20 like
are there are is there trading happening
at the 2030 tener
>> 30 might not be so liquid but 27 and 28
certainly are
>> there is in other energy markets so if
you look at nat gas for instance
although gas traders are really weird
about the futures curve in gas which I
don't really understand but if you look
at that you point out that over the
longer term it's downward sloping which
suggests that there isn't going to as
much demand or maybe there's going to be
more supply out in the future.
>> I love it. We're morphing into natural
gas because that is the main driver of
power prices, especially in Texas. And
the forward curve for gas is much more
liquid than it is for power. And the
forward curve for gas is inverted. It
goes from 370 to 360 by the end of the
decade. So, as my energy analyst Charles
Johnson points out, the bigger driver
there isn't data center demand. We're at
6 BCF a day there. A lot of people are
about 101 12. We can get into that. But
LNG exports were exporting 18 BCF a day.
Now we're gonna add another 12. Like
you'd think that curve
>> would be at least upward sloping by 25
cents, 30 cents. By the way, you can
trade that in your interactive brokers
account.
>> So that goes into is there going to be a
glut of LNG. It starts getting outside
of my expertise. But uh that's what we
heard from a lot of clients last week
when we went on the road all over New
York City.
>> This is very interesting. I actually
want to ask another question about the
the pure power curve but since we are on
LNG and then we can get back to the
power curve just setting aside data
centers etc. Intuitively, you would
think that what is a growth business in
the United States, LG exports. And in
fact, one of the sort of policy debates
around the whole question of building
out LG terminals is
>> it's going to make gas more expensive
for American consumers because now we're
going to be competing with European
buyers, whereas when we didn't have LG
export terminals, we were just swimming
in it because it had nowhere to go.
>> Nowhere to go. So it's very interesting
to hear that even with everyone
acknowledging a booming domestic demand
and b the expected expansion of
international demand that downward
sloping gas curve.
>> Yes. Maybe I don't know maybe they're
reflecting world peace in Europe and
Russia LNG is unacceptable to the rest
of the world. That could be a driver. I
>> then they would have to rebuild that
pipeline though.
>> Yeah. But but back to our original
conversation on demand. The reason I was
talking to the Encore CFO and asking him
about this is he said he's holding$ two
and a half billion dollars of cash
collateral postings from some of that
demand
>> and he's like you're not some you know
Joe Schmo startup I'm going to build a
data center and connect to your grid if
you're posting two and a half billion
dollars and he says and this is what he
said on their earnings call as well you
know that's real demand that is coming
it's it's it's material
>> I'm sorry just now to go back to the
power curve which I get is much less
liquid out there but there are trades
Did that happen? These are price like
why how do you infer volume from price?
Because these are price curves.
>> We don't get the volume but it's a it's
a yearly curve and then right before the
year starts it splits into 12-month
curves and then it goes into weekly
before.
>> But what I'm saying is how do you infer
what expected volume in 2028 is going
from a price curve?
>> Sure. It's it's flat. It goes up a
dollar from here to 2030. Whereas if
you're going to add 20% to your demand
and you'd expect it to go up several
dollars and natural gas side, I'd want
to see 40 cents,50 cents.
>> I see what you're saying.
>> Something like that.
>> And then just to go back to the fork,
you're upper 50s in Texas,
>> low 60s for peak
>> and the data center companies are paying
95. So Vistra just did a deal off
dollars a megawatt hour.
>> Okay.
>> For round the clock. So Vista contracted
out Comanche Peak plant in Texas. $95 a
megawatt hour. So big tech is paying a
very pretty penny. You can argue some of
that's for the CO2 free aspect of it and
some of it's just to lock in the supply.
>> So just to go back to the math and your
overall argument, I mean you're
basically saying that utilities are
already committed to building out I
guess twice as much capacity as is
forecast to be needed by 2030. Yes. The
wild card to me seems to be the demand
forecast, right? And we're already
seeing those change pretty wildly. Um I
know you mentioned Bloomberg NEF but you
know they've they've raised their
forecast um because of the data center
buildout. So they've raised their
forecast of how much energy is actually
needed. How much confidence do you have
in those demand numbers and how could
they change over time?
>> Moderate confidence but like look where
we're at now. Like OpenAI built all the
chatbt using 2 gigawatts. All the big
tech hyperscalers they haven't given
their 2025 volumes yet. But if you take
their 2024 volumes and then double it
and this is output so I'm going to
transfer it back to capacity and you
assume a 60% capacity factor all the
hyperscalers combined are around 15
gigawatts and that's got to be over half
the data center demand. So to talk about
95 gigawatts, I mean it's a staggering
number and then you get more advances
in, you know, Nvidia chip efficiency.
Yeah, obviously Jeban's paradox kicks
in. You've had numerous guests talk
about that.
>> It's just a lot of power. A lot of
power.
>> Can you just remind us one gigawatt is
enough to power what? I like these
comparisons.
>> A million homes, but it depends if
you're in Florida or the Northeast, but
generally speaking, that's where you're
at. Not only do I find electricity
markets and so and market structure and
electricity um very difficult to wrap my
head around. Even after all of these
conversations, I have built no
heruristics or intuitions for what these
a gigawatt, kilowatt, megawatt, like you
say these things and I know gigawatt's
bigger than a kilowatt, but like what
this actually means and then the fact
that even there we're talking about the
difference between a gigawatt and a
gigawatt hour and the like I have yet to
develop the sort of intuitions that I
haven't seen back to the future.
>> Yeah.
>> 1.1 gigawatts.
>> Oh, there you go. We got to print out,
you know, a little table like the way we
used to do for credit ratings in the
financial crisis. We need that up there.
And actually, credit ratings are going
to be interesting from a utilities
perspective as well.
>> Can I just ask um you know, obviously
one of the sensitivities in general um
with all things data center and
utilities is this view and I think it's
kind of overstated. They're like, "Oh,
are is the average rate payer gonna end
up paying for a lot of um data centers
or we'll raise our electricity bill?"
And I understand like these are complex
questions and the math isn't so clear.
And also from what I understand, the
emergence of a data center can actually
lower the a consumer's electricity bill
because there's just that simple math
which is if there's more buyers
splitting the cost of the buildout, then
actually your uh price tag can go down.
But in the scenario you're laying out in
which there's a bunch of upfront capital
investments and everyone's very excited
to build it out and that creates wires
and you have to buy transformers and
gear and all this stuff. If the demand
is does not materialize as expected,
that does sound like conditions in which
we could see consumer rates go up.
>> Absolutely. So that's what we're
spending all our time on. And it's state
by state and even within the same state,
you've got numerous jurisdictions. So,
is it legislatively mandated or is it
done by a rate case? Or in the case of
Northern Indiana, have the companies
themselves, data center companies
themselves, gotten ahead of it and said,
"We're going to put in a solution where
rate payers are absolutely protected and
get money back." So, you look at
Nysource, which is Midwestern Utility.
They own Northern Indiana Public
Service, NIPCO, and they've got a deal
where they've got a inside rate base.
They've got a separate geno. So they s
and that Genko is doing a deal with
Amazon and they're going to kick back a
billion dollars over 15 years to
rateayers. So rather than have a debate,
oh, who's funding what, it's like
>> done and you get $67 million a year. And
that's the blueprint. That's the gold
standard. Yeah. Now, keep in mind,
>> six months before that Genko was
launched,
>> Nicer sold 20% of NIPCO to Blackstone.
So you could argue Blackstone said,
"Hey, let's go ahead and do this." And
then the utility right north of Indiana
or northeast of the Indiana is Ohio. And
the CEO of of First Energy is an ex
Blackstone guy. So maybe they look at
doing a Jenko or something like that.
That's pure speculation. I have no idea.
Pack Gas, Pacific Gas Electric, they've
got a deal where they've got rates in
place that protect residential rate
payers. Uh Amaran has, but a lot of
utilities don't. They don't have these
protections.
>> And the point is someone if it turns out
that there's an overbuild and there's
not as much demand for it, someone's
paying for it. And it either it's going
to be the customers or perhaps utility
shareholders.
>> I mean, you just the political risk of
having mom and pop bail out, you know,
Mark Zuckerberg, Jeff Bezos is just you
can't have that happen. But again, six
months ago, this was coming up on the
tail end of conference calls and now
these utility CEOs are having in their
prepared remarks. So, I'm pretty
confident they're going to figure it
out.
>> Uh, you mentioned Blackstone just then.
I do want to talk about who is currently
making a lot of money from um the data
center buildout, but just to stress test
the thesis a little bit more because it
is a contrarian take and so I think we
should ask a bunch of questions about
it. But
does it take into account time lags for
projects? So I think you know capacity
buildout in the energy sector is
notoriously bureaucratic. That is one
thing that Joe and I do actually know
about the sector. Is it possible that a
lot of these committed projects actually
take much longer to um get working on
the ground than currently forecast?
>> I think the delays will be on building
the new generation, not the data center.
So a data center takes two, three years.
Even if that slips to four, five years,
the power plants take six, seven years.
And as you know, you can't get a Gnova
gas turbine for years and years, which
is obviously a bullish backdrop here.
>> Yeah. talk to us more about that element
of it all because building out the let's
if you overshoot on um uh production
then that's a problem in itself. If you
overshoot on production at a time when
it's gotten really expensive because
there's massive inflation in the uh the
production uh construction sector that's
an even greater problem. talk to us just
about like per any given unit of
productive capacity on the utility side,
how much more expensive has it gotten
and what are you forecasting for that?
>> Sure. So to build a combined single gas
plant 10 years ago was 1,200 a KW to
build. Then it got to 2,000 and utility
analysts like myself was like whoa
that's insane. Now we're up to 3,000.
Then it's like who who's actually
spending this? But that $3,000 a KW for
a new gas plant compares to the data
center itself that cost $40,000.
So for big tech to spend another three
to lock in their gas prices or their
fuel source is like it's nothing. Oh
yeah,
>> it's dimminimous. Which goes back to the
output forward power is 5560 and big
tech's paying 95
>> in the grand scheme of things. So the
cost of data center it's nothing. So
that's why the arts utility analyst are
just jaw-dropping on how shocking it is
big tech's willing to pay these amounts.
>> What about um if you don't measure uh
production of new plants and dollars but
new plants in time and again if you're
talking about okay well we can't get
this turbine that is several years ago
we could have got delivered next month.
How much longer are these projects
taking?
>> So if you can figure this out I think
you're alluding to this. If you can
figure this out you can make a lot of
money. Okay. Because obviously inflation
reduction act had enormous
>> I'm going to vibe code a thing to figure
it out. Keep going.
>> And inflation reduction act enormous tax
credits for renewables. Yeah.
>> And then the one big beautiful bill
obviously clip those if you're not
online by a certain date.
>> So all this data center numbers are
weighted towards the end of the decade.
Whereas the new solar is right here
right now crushing power prices.
>> So you actually want to be a little
short power for the next few years and
then flip to being long. And if you can
figure out when that flip is, you can
make a lot of money in either the
forward power curves or the natural gas
curves. But as far as your original
question, as I said, data centers two,
three years to build new power plants
for five. But then you don't need as
many new power plants as everyone's
saying. So constellation CEO said on a
call the other day, he said he used the
Texas market. He said 87 gawatt peak
market. You could add 10 gawatts to
Texas tomorrow, which would be the
equivalent of sending every single
Nvidia chip for an entire year to Texas
and running them 24/7. That's 10 gawatt
because you could run it right now
existing grid existing plants for all
but 40, 50 hours a year. We stress
tested it. There are some coal plants
that can ramp up capacity factor.
There's plenty of gas plants that can.
So, I don't know if it's 40 hours, 100
hours, 150 hours, but it makes more
sense to pay someone else not to run
their chemical company, their refinery
company for 40, 50 hours a year rather
than have the utilities go out and spend
$10 billion connecting far away wind
farms. That's the argument. We're sort
of come in the middle of it, but there
is plenty of existing capacity on the
grid that could ramp up to meet it. And
then if others guests have pointed out
odd lots, you know, the peak demand of
the grid is 850 gawatts. The overall
size of the grid is 1,200 uh terowatts
and then gigawatts and then you're
adding 50 gawatts a year of solar and
then you're going to start adding 20
gawatts of gas. I mean, we're going to
handle it. I'm not really worried about
any grounds or anything.
>> Oh yeah. Talk to us about regional
transmission because this is something
that we hear a lot. It's not necessarily
the power generation that's an issue
here. It's the transmission which the US
you know seems to struggle with to put
it mildly.
>> So there's regional markets MYSO Midwest
uh the mid-continent uh ISO these guys
are tired the most amount of coal so I
think they're going to be in the worst
shape and then Texas and then it depends
if anyone builds anything in New
England. New England's got the far away
most expensive power prices. $70. The
rest of the country's, you know,
>> I am well aware.
>> Yes, I am too because I live in
Connecticut. So, if anyone builds a data
center in New England, they're going to
be the tightest. But after that, it's
really miso and
>> no one's building data centers in
Vermont where they occasionally have to
switch over to oil and wood, right?
>> I mean, the ISO New England app, which
we all have on our phone, right? They
were getting 40% of their power from oil
in the cold snap the other day. But man,
it's tough to talk about New England
power without talking politics. We're
not going to go down that route.
>> So, uh, so anyway, transmission is very
important because you got to connect all
these far away renewables to the grid.
>> You said something that I think is
actually kind of important. There is
this um narrative meme, you know, people
talk about the AI race, US versus China,
and that one of the things I've seen
people say China is going to win because
they could just build out power more
easily than we can. It sounds like I
know you're not an AI analyst, but
sounds like from your perspective, we
don't know like what it means or who's
going to win US versus China, but that
from your perspective, power is not
going to be the decider here.
>> Not in China. It's not. But it doesn't.
You said like, you know, that we could
ship every current with existing
capacity, we could put every Nvidia chip
in Texas today and we could run them
>> for 50 hours for with the exception of a
few really hot hours in the summer, I
assume.
>> I like the imagery of all the Nvidia
chips going on a field trip to Texas.
>> Texas. But it sounds like to your view
that really isn't going to be from the
US perspective that won't be the binding
constraint.
>> It's it's going to be a little tight,
but I'm not one of these doomsayers. Oh,
it's the absolute gating factor. It's
all going to stop. I was in Shenzhen,
China, uh, last year and a robot got on
one floor and the elevator went up and
it got off another one and I was like,
what is going on here?
Um, there's another reason we wanted to
talk to you aside from your capacity
analysis, which is one of the
interesting things that's been happening
in the credit market is obviously
private credit has been a big story for
the past few years, but now private
credit is getting in on the data center
buildout as well. um they're sort of I
guess getting on your turf a little bit
in the public bond market, but what sort
of activity have you seen there?
>> Sure. So, we think that's where the risk
is going to is going to happen and and
and frankly Bloomberg News broke the
story and PIMCO made $2 billion on day
one loaning to the Meta data center in
Louisiana. So, they priced $25 billion
debt at 220 over treasuries and it
immediately started trading at 140 and
handed PIMCO2 billion. Great for PIMCO,
but then everyone else in
>> nice to be PIMCO, isn't it?
>> It's nice to be PIMCO, especially the
weather in Newport Beach,
>> but everyone else in private credit is
like, "Oh, these guys just made two
billion dollars. We need to start
lending to data centers, and we all know
how this ends. Covenants start falling,
rates start falling, and and again, if
you're big tech, who cares if you
overspend?" Like, you think AI is the be
all end all, you're going to overspend.
when you get down to the second tier,
the QTS's, the Vantages of the world,
and then you get down to sort of the
ones below that and you get like, you
know, the core and the nebuses of the
world, and you know, there's a lot of
shorts going out on Equinex, and
obviously your guest Jim Chanos is all
about the chips. I'm not going to get
into the chip debate,
>> but it's interesting. You look at a core
and they got a $50 billion market cap.
>> That's a real company. You're gonna be
around for a long time, but the bond
market saying, "We want a 10% yield to
loan you 2030 paper." you might not be a
real company and if you look at our
supply demand outlooks we're kind of in
the camp of the bond market but timing
which you mentioned earlier Joe is so
key because this data centers you're
going to ramp for a couple years and the
over supply is really a 2030 event so
good luck timing that one
>> you said something you talked about that
PIMCO meta deal and this question has
come up and I still don't think
got a totally satisfactory answer to it
meta is a
you very highly rated company from your
as you see it as a credit analyst. What
is it about the private credit? You know
they'll talk about oh it's flexible etc.
But you 220 spread over treasuries is
not nothing at all. And is that re is
that 220 spread really like worth it for
like oh a little bit more flexibility
etc. Like what are they paying for
exactly when in the private credit
market that they couldn't get cheaper? I
would think in the public bond market.
>> I don't know but I could speculate.
There's a couple reason if the better
question is why did you put this off
balance sheet?
>> Yeah. All right.
>> So, you got this state-of-the-art data
center with the best Nvidia chips out
there
>> and you're a tech company and AI is the
beall endall for everything. Did you
kick it off your balance sheet because
you didn't want to damage your balance
sheet, but the agencies are imputing it?
But maybe quant funds running their
screens, they don't imputee that. So,
maybe that helps. Or maybe you didn't
want the depreciation running through
your income statement. Maybe that helps.
Or maybe you want to walk from this
thing in five years. I don't know. But
one of those is definitely the reasons
because why else would you pay that much
bigger spread 150 bips over their
borrowing costs?
>> But so the key thing is here when you
talk about that PIMCO meta deal
technically this is not meta debt.
>> It is not. It's
>> right. Okay. So they create a vehicle.
>> They're not going to Okay. That's I
think that's an important element that
they're not just arbitrarily paying a
lot more for like a sort of
>> no
and if you read the credit docs they've
guaranteed this debt
>> even if the data center shuts down but
our understanding of the docs is if they
sell it then the guarantee goes away and
so that would create a little risk but
back to my utility roots
>> please
>> what happens if a data center shuts down
for rate payers and they actually have
an explicit guarantee from Meta to
protect rate payers so they have that. A
lot of other utilities don't. So, a lot
of states, Louisiana, Mississippi,
Tennessee, Texas, they need to do better
job protecting their rateayers. And by
the way, that's just one line in the
dock that could fall away in in other
new data centers. And that's what we
spend our time looking at.
>> You mentioned the credit ratings just
then. Um, so the rating agencies, they
they look at the offbalance sheet
vehicles even though it's not officially
part of the company's debt.
>> They impute the lease payments. Okay.
Uh, and include that as debt. I see
>> for Meta specifically, they won't do
that until the lease starts when it
comes online, but everyone's doing it.
Um, and then I was just thinking, I
don't mean to labor this analogy too
much, but you know, you started out by
talking about all the exciting moments
in the history of being a utilities
analyst, and one of those was Enron,
which I assume means, you know, you have
some experience with circular deals. But
what do you think about all the sort of
incestuous financing deals that seem to
be happening between all the various
players in the data center uh industry?
You mean we'll buy your equity so you
can buy our chips?
>> Yeah.
>> Again, I'm on the side of bond holders
in that one. Just look at the market
caps and look at the bond yields and and
it uh
>> explain what you mean by that for so
>> for people who don't have a Bloomberg.
>> So, Cororeweave goes out for
>> people like me who have a Bloomberg but
are too lazy.
>> So, these names are going out and and
either Open AI or Nvidia is going out
and buying equity in these neocloud
companies. So, then they can go out and
either supply the compute to OpenAI and
buy the chips from Nvidia. So it's all
very circular and I think the example
people used 20 years ago was Nortell was
doing this all the vendor financing.
>> So there's a little bit of skepticism on
that.
>> Okay. So we can't do a utilities
episode. I know we've been focused on
data centers but we can't do a utilities
episode without mentioning nuclear
power. What's it going to take to
actually get, you know, some capacity
from nuclear?
>> Sure. So obviously the Vogle plant was
the last big nuclear plant came online.
was supposed to cost 14 billion. It
ended up costing 32 billion. It came
online 10 years late. No utility wants
to take that risk. Now, everyone's
talking about these small modular
reactors. And I think that's what you're
going to start seeing is more talk of
these. Uh the only way we think a small
modular actor goes final investment
decision fid is if big tech agrees to do
two things. They agree to buy some SMRs
and they invest equity in those SMR
manufacturers to give them the capex to
build
>> which sounds like something they would
do to be honest. for sure. And I think
that's the only way you get one of these
off the ground. And I think if those
stocks rally on that deal, they're all
shorts because they're already
reflecting several of those deals
happening. So the big ones are are New
Scale and and Oaklo. And Sam Alman of
Open AI used to be the chairman of Oaklo
and then he stepped down so they could
do a deal. So something along those
lines would happen. That being said,
Donald Trump has talked about doing work
with Westinghouse and taking equity
ownership to build another AP-1000. And
obviously, President Trump is all about
taking equity, uh, but none of the
utilities in my coverage are going to
build something without some sort of
backs stop.
>> We we did an episode recently with an
infrastructure investor, and I, you
know, I'm a journalist. I I look at the
past. I don't talk about the future, but
I was put on the spot and I said, I
think in the next 20 years, gun to my
head, we will never have another Vogle
or we're not going to have another
project like that uh in America. And
sounds like you agree. I I agree. I do
think you see some SMRs. Okay. I mean,
frankly, our country's been making
nuclear submarines for 67 years. That's
an SMR right there. So, I think that's
the way it happens is big tech goes in
and does that for sure.
>> In 20 years, we'll have you back on to
see whether or not Well, both of you.
>> This is my only I know nothing about the
future. This is my only one call is I
just don't think we're going to ever get
that. Right. That's We're not going to
get a bunch of those things. That's my
>> I'm I'm with you on that. And in 20
years, hopefully I can dial in from the
beach.
>> All right. See you in 20 years then. No,
probably before because this was a
fantastic conversation. Thank you so
much for coming on all bots.
>> Great. Thanks for having me,
>> Joe. That was a really fun conversation.
>> That was super fun. I love that.
>> My the opinion or framing that I'm sort
of coalesing around is that AI can be
simultaneously underhyped and
overvalued, right? And actually
throughout history, that's kind of what
we've seen with transformative
technology, right? Like think about the
internet bubble. The internet changed
the world, but it was a bubble. Think
about railroads. Railroads in the 1800s
changed the world, but also a bubble.
So, I think that's kind of it's kind of
what I think. The key issue, which Andy
and you both touched on, is the timing,
right?
>> The timing. And yeah, I mean, I think
it's look it's very interesting because
of course his argument does doesn't
even, you know, doesn't even rest on any
valuations right now. It's like there is
all of this expectation for buildout.
There is a you know as he put it there
is a number for the amount of uh the
volume of data center demand. there is
an amount that's being built up and it's
like the second number looks bigger and
that's going to be a that's going to be
a problem and the time to your point
like it I thought you know really
interesting observation he had it was a
little bit not tangential to his core
idea but this idea that some of our
energy policies are encouraging a lot of
production right now particularly the
expiring solar credits at the same time
a lot of this demand is going to come
online in the back end etc. Um, I do
think it, you know, seems like a really
it definitely seems like a fun space.
It's very far from when we were just
talking about like utilities as uh as
rate proxies, something for old people
to get uh income.
>> Well, the other thing I was thinking
about on the demand side is I think
there's a tendency among
>> AI bulls, VI coders such as yourself,
right? To think that demand is just
going to go one way, right? So there's
going to be more demand for AI because
>> I don't know every piece of software is
going to be replicated through claude
code or whatever. And so
>> power demand is going to go up as well.
But what we've seen so far is that these
things are getting more and more
efficient.
>> They're definitely getting more and more
efficient. Yeah.
>> Like faster than anyone expected.
>> Yeah. You know, I this is a little bit
um tangential to the point, but I do
think like one of the recurring
phenomenas that we're seeing across this
uh industry is that every I mean and
this is I guess it's a bull case which
is that you know even the optimists keep
getting uh turned out to be too too
pessimistic the pace of say like
efficiency gains for the cost of
processing a token dropping faster than
people expected this morning recording
this January 28th. ASML, the big chip uh
equipment company way better than
expected. The EVALs, the benchmarks for
the models where it's like the optimist
say like maybe it could code at this
level by 2027, turns out it hits there
by like you know early 2026,
etc. So like if you want to just make
I'm not making any case here, but if you
just want to like make a bull case, it's
like even the optimists um keep getting
surprised to the upside. On the other
hand, it's fascinating to hear him say,
"Look at what the markets are saying.
They're not pricing in any of these
expectations." And I was particularly
surprised because I didn't realize this
that even like, you know, for all of the
talk of LG export terminals, etc., that
gas is expected to be cheaper a few
years from now than it is right now.
>> Uh very interesting dissonance between
that and the popular narrative.
>> Maybe uh gas traders just aren't vibe
coders yet. That's
>> then they would understand exactly how
much more of this uh we're going to
need.
>> But just from an energy perspective
though there is a push and pull factor
here, right? So on the one hand everyone
could use AI and demand goes up but on
the other hand maybe it gets super super
efficient and then demand goes down. And
I think that's that's the difficulty
>> or it's just there is a number that's
out there with like sort of like some
reasonable inferences about where it's
going to go and it's very high and it
was actually very striking listening to
him talk about some of those super uh
the hyperscaler numbers because it's
like where does it add up right like as
he pointed out okay chat GPT like came
out in two gigawatts etc. Like there
aren't a ton of chat GPTs out there,
right? And that's one of the most
computationally intensive things. Like
maybe there are reasons to think this is
all going to go great. There's going to
be a ton of money made in AI, but you
can't really just like get to the
number. I don't know. I think he um it
was this was a very useful perspective
just sort of on some of the simple math
and the math sounds like it's
subtraction. Like this sounds like what
my son is learning about right now. The
other thing I thought was really
interesting was the response to your
question about why would you finance
these things off balance sheet if
you're, you know, this massive cashrich
technology giant. And the suggestion
there was, well, maybe at some point in
the future, like five years down the
line, you need to get rid of this
liability. You don't want to deal with
it.
>> This is why we did that episode with the
guy who has uh, you know, the company
doing the legal docs, right, etc. This
is why um it's pretty crucial to
understand some of these things because
some of the questions sound like the um
Facebook's or Meta's option to walk away
right there's some call option
implicitly to walk away etc. And they uh
they how they what they could do what
scenarios and what they would allow to
be do is obviously going to be pretty
crucial for any investors in this
offbalance sheet paper. I did not know
until you asked this whole idea that um
the ratings agencies while they don't
look at it as debt they do back out a
lease cost and therefore it can inform
their overall um credit sustainability.
Well, the other thing, you know, we
touched on this, but there's more and
more demand from investors for data
center debt, right? Like the space is
getting more, for some reason, the space
is getting more competitive. And so,
naturally, what you see in any other
credit cycle throughout history is as
demand grows and people are competing
for deals,
>> the documentation and the protections
tend to weird. You know, I I find the
existence of hype cycles for debt to be
a little bit weird because I get like,
oh, I really want to get into AI equity,
right? Because that could 100x next
year, right?
>> It's like, oh, I'm really excited about
getting into data center debt because it
might pay me 50 bips more. I find to be
very strange or 100 bips more. It's like
if I have a fixed look, I'm a simple a
simple guy, but if I have a fixed income
allocation, all I care about is
minimizing downside. Um, and I don't
really care like what sector it is. I'm
not participating in the upside.
>> You're not going to get greedy.
>> You're not going to get rich. I don't
care. You're not going to get super rich
on like I just don't want to lose my
like for fixed income. I just don't want
to lose my money.
>> Fair enough. All right. Shall we leave
it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the All
Thoughts Podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You
can follow me at Traceeway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart. Follow our
producers, Carmen Rodriguez, at Carmen
Arman, Dash Bennett at Dashbot, and
Kaleb Brooks at Kalebrooks.
>> And if you want more OddLots content,
you should check out our daily
newsletter where we write about things
like Andy's forecast for uh energy
capacity. You can find that at
bloomberg.com/obbots.
>> And you can talk about all of these
topics and more with fellow listeners in
our Discord, discord.gg/odlots.
And if you enjoyed this conversation,
then please leave a comment or like the
video or better yet subscribe.
>> Thanks for watching.